---
title: Poem 1 — 秋の田の
date: "2023-08-24T10:59:32.980Z"
description: "The first poem in the Hyakunin Isshu, written by Emperor Tenji."
tags: ["Hyakunin Isshu"]
---

The first poem in the Hyakunin Isshu is one by Emperor Tenji (625-672).
| | | |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 秋の田の | *aki no ta no* | The hatching of the roof |
| かりほの庵の | *kariho no io no* | of the harvest hut |
| 苫をあらみ | *toma wo arami* | in the autumn fields is coarse; |
| わが衣手は | *waga koromode wa* | and my sleeves |
| 露にぬれつつ | *tsuyu ni nuretsutsu* | are growing wet with dew. |

## Meaning

### First verse

Starting off the first verse, **秋の田** immediately sets the scene of an autumn field. **かりほの庵** then situates us in a hut built for the autumn harvest. Here, かりほ can be interpreted in two ways: firstly, as a contraction of 仮の庵 (かりのいほ), or as 刈穂 (かりほ). 仮の庵 translates literally to *temporary hut*, and specifically means a hut built to store crops during a harvest to protect them from animals and the elements. 刈穂, on the other hand, is literally *reaped grains*. When combined with の庵 (where 庵 is a general word for hut), it becomes a hut for reaped grains, achieving the same meaning as 仮の庵. This makes かりほ a pivot word - 掛詞 (かけことば) - a word or phrase that has multiple interpretations. Pivot words allow for the deepening of meaning without extra syllables. They are well-observed in ancient Japanese poetry as brevity and syllable limits were highly valued. The repetition of both 庵 and の throughout these two lines sets the tone and builds rhythm. Finally, the verse ends with **苫をあらみ** - an observation of the courseness of the hut's thatching.

### Second verse

A villager would be tasked with sleeping in the hut overnight to guard the harvest from wild animals and robbers. The second verse looks at the experience of our narrator, who is implied to have been assigned this role. They lament that their sleeves (**わが衣手**) are growing wet with due (**露にぬれつつ**), presumably due to the roughness of the thatching observed in the first verse. The verb conjugation つつ indicates repetition, invoking both a periodic drip of water leaking through the roof as well as a sense of continued action.

However, this is not where the meaning of the second verse ends. Wet sleeves are a common motif in ancient Japanese poetry. Often, they are referenced with regards to a literal occurrence (in this case, sleeves dampening with dew) but are used as a metaphor for grief or sorrow, with the sleeves growing wet with tears. In the case of this poem, it can be interpreted as Emperor Tenji's grief and sympathy for his people, who had to endure cold nights in rough huts to make a living.

### Overall

Thus, the poem is simultaneously the lived experience of a peasant sleeping in a leaky hut during the autumn harvest as well as the sympathy of a benevolent emperor lamenting his people's hardships.

## Emperor Tenji

## Significance
